
===== PAGE 1 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             1      
                                                                                    
       ANN     vs  SNN:     A  case   study   for  Neural    Decoding      in       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                 Implantable      Brain-Machine        Interfaces                   
                                                                                    
           Zhou Biyan* Member, IEEE, Pao-Sheng Vincent Sun* Member, IEEE, and Arindam Basu , Senior
                                      Member, IEEE                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
        Abstract—While it is important to make implantable brain- ThemajorityofclinicaliBMIsystemshaveawiredconnec-
       machine interfaces (iBMI) wireless to increase patient comfort tion from the implant to the outside world [1]. However, this
       andsafety,thetrendofincreasedchannelcountinrecentneural entails a risk of infection leading to the increasing interest
       probes poses a challenge due to the concomitant increase in                  
                                           in wireless neural interfaces [1], [9], [10]. Another trend
       the data rate. Extracting information from raw data at the                   
       source by using edge computing is a promising solution to this in the field has been the continual increase in the number
       problem, with integrated intention decoders providing the best of electrodes [11] to increase the number of simultaneously
       compression ratio. In this work, we compare different neural recorded neurons (Fig. 1(b)) which can increase the accuracy
       networks (NN) for motor decoding in terms of accuracy and                    
                                           ofdecodinguserintentandenabledexterouscontrol.Recently
       implementationcost.Wefurthershowthatcombiningtraditional                     
                                           developed Neuropixels technology has pushed the number of
       signal processing techniques with machine learning ones deliver              
       surprisingly good performance even with simple NNs. Adding recordedneuronsto≈1000.However,thismakesitaproblem
       a block Bidirectional Bessel filter provided maximum gains of for wireless implants due to the conflicting requirements of
       ≈ 0.05, 0.04 and 0.03 in R2 for ANN 3d, SNN 3D and ANN high data rate and low power consumption [12]. Hence, there
       models, while the gains were lower (≈ 0.02 or less) for LSTM                 
                                           are efforts to compress the neural data on the sensor by
       and SNN streaming models. Increasing training data helped                    
                                           extracting information from it by edge computing (Fig. 1(c)).
       improve the R2 of all models by 0.03−0.04 indicating they                    
       have more capacity for future improvement. In general, LSTM Different degrees of computing can be embedded in the
       andSNN streamingmodelsoccupythehighandlowendsofthe implant ranging from spike detection, sorting to decoding
       pareto curves (for accuracy vs. memory/operations) respectively [13]. Ideally, decoding on implant can provide the maximum
       whileSNN 3DandANN 3Doccupyintermediatepositions.Our                          
                                           compression [14] with the added benefit of patient privacy
       work presents state of the art results for this dataset and paves            
                                           since the data does not need to leave the implant—only
       the way for decoder-integrated-implants of the future.                       
                                           motor commands are sent out. Traditional decoders have used
        Index Terms—implantable-brain machine interface, intention                  
                                           methods from statistical signal processing such as Kalman
       decoder, spiking neural networks, low-power.                                 
                                           Filters and their variants [15]. With the rapid growth of
       ListofAbbreviations-                Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and variants for many
                                           differentapplications,itisnaturaltoexploretheusageofsuch
        iBMI ImplantableBrainMachineInterface                                       
                                           techniques for motor decoding and several such works have
        NHP Non-humanPrimate                                                        
        SNN SpikingNeuralNetwork           recently been published [14], [16].      
        ANN ArtificialNeuralNetwork         To fit on the implant, the decoder has to be extremely
        LSTM LongShortTermMemory                                                    
                                           energy and area efficient along with being accurate. Brain-
                                           inspired SNN are supposed to be more energy-efficient due
                                           to their event-driven nature. They are also expected to be
                   I. INTRODUCTION         betteratmodelingsignalswithtemporaldynamicsduetotheir
                                           inherent “stateful” neurons with memory. However, detailed
       IMPLANTABLE Brain-Machine Interfaces (iBMI) (Fig.                            
                                           comparisons between SNN and ANN variants with controlled
         1(a)) are a promising class of assistive technology that                   
                                           datasets and benchmarking procedures have been lacking. A
       enables the reading of a person’s intent to drive an actuator                
                                           recent effort [17] has put together a benchmarking suite to
       [1]. It holds promise to enable paralyzed patients to perform                
                                           addressthisgapandonechosentaskisthatofmotordecoding.
       activities of daily living with partial or total autonomy [1].               
                                           Weusethesamedatasetforbenchmarkingandshowadditional
       Whilethefirstapplicationswereinmotorprosthesestocontrol                      
                                           results for more control cases.          
       a cursor on a computer screen [2], or wheelchairs [3], or                    
                                            Neurobench showed that streaming SNNs provide a good
       roboticarms[4],recentstudieshaveshownremarkableresults                       
                                           tradeoffintermsofaccuracyvscomputeswhileothermethods
       for speech decoding [5], [6], handwritten text generation [7]                
                                           could have similar memory footprint. Further, it was shown
       and therapies for other mental disorders [8].                                
                                           thatexpandingtraditionalANNwithtemporalmemory(ANN-
                                           flat) at the input could drastically increase accuracy albeit at
        B.ZhouandP.S.V.Sunhavecontributedequally.Allauthorsarewiththe               
       DepartmentofElectricalEngineering,CityUniversityofHongKong.(e-mail: the cost of increased operations. Hence, we ask the question
       arinbasu@cityu.edu.hk)              – will ANN models augmented with memory be better than
        The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the          
                                           SNNs in terms of the tradeoff between accuracy and cost
       Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,      
       China(ProjectNo.CityU11200922).     (memory, operations/energy)? We make the following novel
  3202                                                                              
  ceD                                                                               
  62                                                                                
  ]GL.sc[                                                                           
  1v98851.2132:viXra                                                                

===== PAGE 2 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             2      
                                                                                    
                                            Kalman filter has an outstanding ability to cope with dy-
                                           namic and uncertain environments and is suited in real-time
                                           applications.ThatmakesKalmanfilteroneofthemostwidely
                                           used decoding algorithms in iBMI systems. However, the
                                           conventional Kalman filter is only optimal for linear variables
                                           and Gaussian noise [15]. Many variants of Kalman filter
                                           have been proposed to be applied to different applications or
                                           environments, such as decoding for cursor movement [15],
                                           predicting the movement for clinical devices [12], controlling
           (a)                  (b)        the robotic arms [22], speech decoding [5].
       Implanted           1010    Wearable                                         
                           1101                                                     
           Amp ADC SPD + DecodDeecode Tx Rx B. Machine Learning Decoders            
                        (c)                 Machine learning is widely used in various applications
       Fig. 1: (a) Conceptual figure of an iBMI that reads user intent due to its powerful ability to process complex data. An SVM
       and controls an effector. (b) Trend of exponential increase decoder could be trained to analyze rhythmic movements of
       in the number of simultaneously recorded neurons [18]. (c) Quadriplegiapatients[23],ormotorcontrolofparalyzedlimbs
       Integrating computing in the implant can reduce the wireless [24]. Recently, ANNs have attracted much attention among
       datarate enabling scalability of iBMI systems. machine learning algorithms and have made great progress
                                           in BMI decoding. ELM-based intelligent intracortical BMI (
                                           i2 BMI ) achieves an outstanding performance compared to
       contributions in this paper:                                                 
                                           traditionalsignalprocessingdecoders[14].Amulti-layerANN
        • We compare SNNs with ANNs with memory augmen- istrainedtodecodethefingermovementrunninginareal-time
          tation at hidden state (by using LSTM) and output BMI system, which outperforms a Kalman filter [16].
          (by incorporating a traditional Bessel filter from signal Recurrent neural networks (RNN) were introduced since
          processing).                     they are more skilled at capturing the relations between two
        • We show that combining NNs with traditional signal variables using a hidden state with memory. For instance,
          processing methods such as filtering drastically improves there have been studies on decoding speech [6] and on
          performance at minimial cost of additional operations or brain representation for handwriting [7]. Long-term decoding
          memory.                          achievedhigherperformancebyusingLSTMandWienerfilter
        • Weshowtheeffectofincreasingtrainingdatathatshows [25]. To decode speech for a paralyzed person, a natural-
          which models have potential for improvements in future. language model and Viterbi decoder are used [26].
        • We show the effect of testing with better curated data. Neuromorphic algorithms have emerged as an energy-
        Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows.Thefollowing efficient decoder and an effective tool for data compression
       section discusses some of the related works while Section [27]. SNN is a brain-inspired neural network popular in
       III describes the dataset, models and pre-processing used in neuromorphicapplicationsduetoitslowenergy.Itcanachieve
       this work. Section IV presents the results comparing different nearly the same accuracy as ANN but with less than 10%
       modelsintermsoftheirperformance-costtradeoffusingpareto memory access and computation of ANN [28]. Similarly, it
       curves.ThisisfollowedbyasectionVthatdiscussesthemain wasfoundthattheSNNdecoderscouldusefarfewercomputes
       results and provides additional control experiments. Finally, compared to ANN, but with a performance penalty in accu-
       we summarize our findings and conclude in the last section. racy, for the motor prediction of primates in the Neurobench
                                           benchmark suite [17].                    
                                            In this work, we show that the combination of traditional
            II. RELATEDWORKSANDCONTRIBUTION                                         
                                           signal processing and machine learning algorithms results in
        The current work on designing decoders for motor pros- the best decoders for iBMI systems.
       theses can be divided into two broad categories–those using                  
       traditional signal processing methods and more recent ones                   
                                                      III. METHODOLOGY              
       based on machine learning.                                                   
                                            List of notations used in this section  
                                            • N i : ith layer’s neuron count        
       A. Traditional Signal Processing Decoders                                    
                                            • N ch : No. of Input Probes            
        AnearlydecoderusedinBMIsystemisthelineardecoder, • x i : Computed feature from i-th probe
       such as population vector (PV) algorithm [19]. Optimal linear • T W : Bin window duration
       estimators (OLE), generalized from PV algorithm, has com- • m: Number of sub-windows in a bin
       parable performance in closed-loop BMI systems, Whereas • St: Stride size    
       Bayesian algorithms perform better [20]. Inspired by estima- • s: Sparsity   
       tion and communication theory, Wiener filter improved linear • d: Dropout rate
       decoders by combining neuron history activation [21]. • f GT : Ground truth label frequency (=1/T GT )

===== PAGE 3 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             3      
                                                                                    
                                             Target                                 
                                                  0.6 0.6 ... 0.6 0.6 -1.5 -1.5 ... -1.5 0.7
                                            Loca on                                 
                                                 Start of End of 1st Start of End of 2nd Start of
                                                 1st Reach Reach 2nd Reach Reach 3rd Reach
                                                                  Reach Boundary    
                                                            (a)                     
             Monkey’s           Reach                                               
                        g                                                           
              Cursor           Trajectory                                           
       Fig. 2: The experiment in the dataset has the NHP controlling                
       the cursor and moving it to the target location. Once the NHP                
       completestheaction(referredtoasareach),thetargetlocation                     
       will move to a new location, and the subject will move the 1st Reach 2nd Reach3rd Reach 4th Reach 5th Reach
       cursor accordingly.                                                          
       A. Dataset                                                                   
        The primate reaching dataset chosen for this paper was                      
       gathered and released by [29], with the six files chosen for                 
       Neurobench [17] being the files of interest. These six files                 
       are recordings of two non-human primates (NHP) (Indy and                     
       Loco), where each NHP accounts for three files (more details                 
       aboutthischoicein[17]).Thisdatasetcontainsmicroelectrode                     
       array (MEA) recordings of the NHP’s brain activity while it                  
       is moving a cursor to the target location, as seen in Figure 2.              
       The finger velocity is sampled at f = 250 Hz resulting in GT                 
       ground truth labels at a fixed interval of T = 4 ms. The                     
                                GT                                                  
       target position changes once the monkey successfully moves                   
       the cursor to the intended target. We refer to this action as a              
       reach. The dataset contains a continuous stream of the brain’s               
       activity from one MEA with N = 96 probes (Indy) or two ch                    
       MEAswithN =192probes(Loco).Inthiswork,weignore                               
               ch                                                                   
       sorted spikes since it has been shown that spike detection                   
       provides sufficient information for decoding [30] and is more                
       stableovertime.Hence,thenumberofprobesN istheinput ch                        
       feature dimension N for the neural network models (except 0                  
       ANN 3D) that will be discussed in the following subsection.                  
        Training NN models on time series-based data requires the                   
       data to be split apart into separate segments. In analogy with               
       keyword spotting [17], each segment of neural data should                    
       correspondtoseparatekeywords.Byusingthetargetpositions                       
       in this dataset, we can separate the spike data into segments                
       based on indices in the target position array where there is a               
       change in values, as illustrated in Figure 3. Such consecutive               
       indices forms the beginning and end of a reach, and then we                  
       can split the time series into training, validation, and test sets           
       based on the number of reaches. The split ratio used in this                 
       paper follows that of Neurobench [17], which is 50% for the                  
       training set, and 25% each for validation and test sets. The                 
       total number of reaches recorded in each file can be seen in                 
       Table I.                                                                     
       B. Network Models                                                            
        To explore the potential of various neural network models                   
       as the neural decoder, five different model architectures with               
       and without memory are tested: ANN, ANN 3D, SNN 3D,                          
       Streaming SNN and LSTM, which can be seen in Figure 4.                       
       These five models use popular NN architectures and have                      
                                            yticoleV x                              
                                                            (b)                     
                                           Fig. 3: How each reach is defined in this work: a) The start
                                           and end of a reach are marked by the index where there is a
                                           change in the target location array, indicating the monkey has
                                           moved the cursor to the previous target location. b) A sample
                                           segmenttakenfromthefileindy 20160622 01,wherewecan
                                           see five consecutive reaches being segmented.
                                                 TABLE I: Number of reaches in each file
                                                   Filename    NumberofReaches      
                                                indy 20160622 01   970              
                                                indy 20160630 01   1023             
                                                indy 20170131 02   635              
                                                loco 20170131 02   587              
                                                loco 20170215 02   409              
                                                loco 20170301 05   472              
                                           memory at the input layer or hidden layer. Every model
                                           except for LSTM has two versions of varying complexity
                                           (explained in section IV-A) where complexity refers to the
                                           modelsizeindicatingthenumberofneurons.Thelargermodel
                                           is henceforth referred to as the base model while the smaller
                                           model is dubbed the tiny variant. It was found that networks
                                           deeper than 3 layers performed poorly and hence deeper
                                           models were excluded from this study.    
                                            1) ANN or ANN 2D                        
                                              The ANN model has an architecture of N − N −
                                                                       ch   1       
                                              N −2, with rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the acti-
                                               2                                    
                                              vation function for the first two-layers as well as batch
                                              normalizationtoimproveupontheaccuracyobtainedby
                                              the model. Note that N = N indicates one feature
                                                            0   ch                  
                                              extracted from each probe obtained by summing the
                                              neural spikes over a fixed duration of T as described
                                                                     W              
                                              inSectionIII-C.Also,N =2correspondstopredicting
                                                            3                       
                                              the X and Y velocities. A dropout layer with a dropout
                                              rate of 0.5 is also added to the first two layers to
                                              help regularize the model. In analogy with the naming
                                              conventionofANN 3Dintroducednext,thismodelcan
                                              also be referred to as ANN 2D due to the shape of the
                                              input weight tensor.                  
                                            2) ANN 3D or ANN flat                   
                                              The architecture of the ANN 3D or ANN flat model is
                                              m×N  −N  −N −2,i.e.itsharesanidenticalarchi-
                                                  ch  1  2                          
                                              tecture with ANN, except at the input layer. This model
                                              dividestheT durationoftheinputbinwindowintom
                                                      W                             

===== PAGE 4 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             4      
                                                                                    
                                       input_features                               
          input_features input_features               input_features                
                                       Layer Norm (Nch)                             
                                                                     Input features 
            ReLU                                                    Layer Norm (Nch)
                                        LIF Neuron                                  
          Linear Layer (N1, N2)                        LIF Neuron                   
                                       Linear Layer (N2, 2)                         
                                                                   Linear Layer (NLSTM, 2)
          Linear Layer (N2, 2)                                       Output (2)     
                                        Scaling (2)                                 
           Output (2)     Output (2)                   Output (2)                   
                                        Output (2)                                  
             (a)           (b)           (c)            (d)            (e)          
        Fig. 4: Architecture of models used in this paper are a) ANN b) ANN 3D c) SNN 3D d) SNN Streaming and e) LSTM.
          sub-windows and creates a m-dimensional feature from connectedlayer,β isthedecayrate,S [t]istheoutput
                                                                   out              
          eachprobebysummingspikesineachsub-window.This spike, U is the membrane potential threshold, U
                                                   thr                      sub     
          modeofinputwillbefurtherexplainedinSectionIII-C. is the subtracted value if the reset mechanism is reset-
          Theinputwillthenbeflattenedacrossthesub-windows, by-subtraction and θ is the reset mechanism. The LIF
          yielding a final input dimension of N ×m; hence, the neurons for all layers shares the same U and β.
                               ch                                      thr          
          numberofweights/synapsesinthefirstlayerismtimes The first two layer uses the reset-to-zero mechanism
          morethanANN.ItisreferredtoasANN flatin[17];we while the last layer does not use any reset to allow the
          refertoitasANN 3Dhereinkeepingwiththeshapeof final output neurons to accumulate membrane potential
          the input weight tensor, which we feel is more intuitive. to predict the velocity of the primate’s movement. For
        3) LSTM                               everystrideof4ms,themembranevoltagesareresetand
          The LSTM model contains a single LSTM layer of the integration is restarted with fresh input to produce
          dimensionN ,followedbyafully-connectedlayer the next output.              
                 LSTM                                                               
          of dimension 2. The input of the model shares the same The input for the SNN 3D model is different from
          pre-processorasANN(summingspikesinabin-window ANN and identical to ANN 3D; however, unlike the
          of duration T ); however it uses a different T . The ANN 3Dmodel,thespikecountsinthemsub-windows
                  W                  W                                              
          input is first normalized with a layer normalization, spanningT areinputtotheLIFneuronusingonlyone
                                                     W                              
          before passing through the rest of the network. weight/synapsebutovermtimesteps.Duetotheresetof
        4) SNN 3D or SNN flat                 the LIF neurons after every prediction, overlapping bin-
          The SNN 3D shares a similar architecture with ANN windows (for T > st) cause the SNN 3D to process
                                                       W                            
          (N −N  −N −2), with the following differences: the same input spikes for multiple predictions.
            ch  1  2                                                                
          1) Instead of using standard activation like ReLU, the 5) SNN Streaming   
          SNN 3D model uses the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) The SNN Streaming model also consists of three fully-
          neuron after every fully-connected layer, 2) the input connectedlayers(N −N −N −2),withLIFneurons
                                                          ch 1  2                   
          is first passed through layer normalization, similar to (see Eq. 1) in each layer. Unlike SNN 3D, every LIF
          LSTM due to the recurrent nature of LIF, and 3) at layerhasitsownuniqueU andβ.JustlikeSNN 3D,
                                                             thr                    
          the final layer there is a scaling layer applied to the the first two layer uses reset-to-zero while the last layer
          output LIF neurons. The LIF neurons are governed by does not reset its membrane potential. In this model,
          the following set of equations:     T  = T  = St = 4 ms and hence does not require
                                               W   GT                               
                                              any additional pre-processing as seen in Section III-C;
            U[t]=βU[t−1]+WX[t]−S [t−1]θ                                             
                             out              hence, it is called a streaming mode since inputs can
             β =e−∆t/τ                        stream in directly and continuously to this model.
                (cid:40)                                                            
                 1 if U[t]>U                                                        
          S  [t]=        thr                                                        
           out                                                                      
                 0 otherwise                                                        
                                           C. Input Spike Processing                
                                                                                   
                 0            if no reset                                           
                                                                                  
             θ = βU[t−1]+WX[t] if reset-to-zero The spikes generated by the NHP’s neurons are sparse
                U                                                                 
                              if reset-by-subtraction                               
                                           in nature. While SNNs are designed with sparsity in mind,
                  sub                                                               
                                           standard neural networks are not and hence require a fea-
                                        (1)                                         
                                           ture extraction step from the raw spike data. Also, from
          where U[t] and X[t] are the membrane potential of the biological viewpoint, it is generally assumed that short
          the LIF neuron and the input at the t-th time step term firing rates are important for motor control. Hence, we
          respectively, W is the synaptic weight of the fully- calculate firing rates, r (t ) at the sample time t from the
                                                        i k            k            

===== PAGE 5 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             5      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                               P                  2 1 1 P 1                  0      
       P P 1               3 4 3 3 P 1 2          1 2 1 P 2                  0      
        2                      P                  3 2 1 P                    1      
       P                   6 5  3                       3                           
        3                                                                           
                               P                  1 1 2                             
       P n t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 5 t 6 t 7 t 8 t 9 t 3 4 n t 1 t t s 2 t 3 t 4 t t 5 t 6 t 7 t 8 t 9 t ts ts 2 ts 3 P n t 1 t 2 t 3 t 4 t 5 t 1 t 5
                 t                 1                                                
                 bw                   Bin Window   dow                     ride     
                 (a)                     (b)                      (c)               
       Fig. 5: Input data pre-processing methods presented in this paper: a) Summation mode, where the number of spikes detected
       within a bin window T for each probe is summed to create a feature. b) Sub-window mode, where the bin window is further
                    W                                                               
       divided into m sub-windows, and the number of spikes detected within each sub-window is summed. c) Streaming mode,
       where the input spike is gathered as it is.                                  
                     (cid:80)                                                       
       spike waveforms P = δ(t − t ) on the i-th probe vectorx(t )forANN 3DisdefinedaccordingtoEqua-
                  i    ts,i  s,i                    k                               
       (1≤i≤N ) using the following equation: tion (4) as follows:                  
             ch                                                                     
                      (cid:90) tk                   x(t )=[x (t ),x (t )..x (t )] (4)
                 r (t )=   P (t)dt      (2)           k   0 k  1 k Nch k            
                  i k       i                                                       
                       tk−TW                  where the dimension of x(t            
                                                               k                    
                                                                ) is N              
                                                                    ch              
                                                                     × m. For the   
       where t − t = T is the sampling time, t denote SNN 3D, the firing rates in each sub-window are given
           k+1  k   GT              s,i                                             
       neuralspiketimesonthei-thprobeandT isthebinwindow as input feature to the SNN , which has m time steps.
                              W                                                     
       duration.Threedifferentpre-processingmethodswereusedin Thus the input feature vector for the SNN in the j-th
       this paper: the summation method, the sub-window method time step (1≤j ≤m) is given by:
       and the streaming method as illustrated in Figure 5. For all of              
                                                    x (t )=[r1(t ),r2(t )...rNch(t )] (5)
       them, the stride size, st is identical to the sampling duration, j k j k j k j k
       which is T GT = 4 ms. They differ in the choice of T W and where the dimension of x j (t k ) is N ch . Note that ‘j’
       howtopresentthefiringinformationinthebinwindowtothe indexes time steps here and the SNN output at j = m
       network as described next.             is the prediction of motor velocity for sample time t .
                                                                            k       
        1) Summation Method (used in ANN and LSTM): 3) Streaming Method (used in SNN Streaming): The
          This is the simplest case where the firing rate in a bin streaming method, as the name suggests, processes the
          windowwithdurationofT isdirectlyusedasafeature incoming spike data as a continuous stream as seen in
                         W                                                          
          and input to the NN. We define the input feature vector Figure 5(c). In this case, T W = st = T GT = 4 ms
          x(t ) as follows:                   implyingnooverlapbetweenconsecutivewindows.This
            k                                                                       
                                              allows for a direct interface between the probes and the
                x(t k )=[x 0 (t k ),x 1 (t k ),...,x Nch (t k )] model, without the need of adding additional compute
               x (t )=r (t )            (3)   cost to our network like the two methods mentioned
                i k  i k                                                            
                                              before. The input feature vector x(t ) is given by the
                                                                   k                
          This method is depicted in Figure 5(a). This method                       
                                              following equation:                   
          is used by ANN and LSTM models, where ANN uses                            
          T W = 200ms while LSTM uses T W = 32ms. Efficient x(t k )=[u(r 0 (t k )),u(r 1 (t k )),...u(r Nch (t k ))] (6)
          implementationofsuchfiringratecalculationwithover-                        
                                              where u() denotes the Heaviside function. Hence, the
          lapping windows are shown in [30].                                        
                                              resulting SNN can replace multiply and accumulate
        2) Sub-WindowMethod(usedinANN 3DandSNN 3D):                                 
                                              (MAC) operations by selective accumulation (AC) op-
          Similar to the summation method, the sub-window                           
                                              erations.                             
          methodusesinformationoverthelatestT binwindow.                            
                                 W                                                  
          However, instead of summing all the spikes, it provides                   
                                           D. Filter: Adding memory at output       
          firing rate information at an even shorter time-scale                     
          (or with finer resolution) of T /m. Thus, the feature Most of the NN models (with the exception of LSTM and
                            W                                                       
          computed from the i-th probe itself becomes a vector SNN Streaming)introducedinSectionIII-Boperateonawin-
          x (t ) = [r1(t ),r2(t )...rm(t )] with m components doworchunkofinputs;providingthesewindowsinanyorder
           i k   i k i k  i k                                                       
          corresponding to firing rates in each of the m sub- would result in the same prediction. However, in real life the
          windows (duration of integration in Eq. 2 is reduced motor output is a smooth signal with a continuous trajectory.
          to T /m). The sub-window method is illustrated in To understand this, we plot in Fig. 6 the frequency content
             W                                                                      
          Figure 5(b) and is used by the ANN 3D and SNN 3D of ground truth trajectories of a sample 2-sec waveform and
          models with T = 200ms and m = 7. The feature compareitwithpredictedtrajectoriesoftwomodelsfrom[17].
                   W                                                                

===== PAGE 6 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             6      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           í                                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           í                                                                       
                                                                                    
                í     í                                              
                        ) U H T X H Q F \                                           
           H G X W L O S P $                                                        
                                           evaluated from model size where every parameter is stored
                                           using a 32-bit float number. For (3), R-Squared score is a  $ 1 1 B  '
                                 6 1 1 B  ' commonly used metrics for regression tasks [14], [15], [17],
                                 * 7       which is defined by Equation (7):        
                                 & X W R I I  ) U H T X H Q F \                    
                                                           (cid:80)n (y −yˆ)2       
                                                     R2 =1− i=1 i i         (7)     
                                                           (cid:80)n (y −y¯)2       
                                                            i=1 i                   
                                           where the label and predictions are showing as y and yˆ re-
                                                                       i   i        
                                           spectivelywhiley¯isthemeanoflabels.Formotorprediction,
                                           separate R2 and R2 are computed for predicting X and Y
                                                 X    Y                             
                                           velocities respectively and the final R2 is an average of the
                                           two.                                     
                                            Another set of important metrics for NN hardware are
                                           throughput and latency. We have not considered them here
                                           since the considered NN models are small enough so that
                                           the total time taken for evaluating the prediction is dominated
                                           by the input data accumulation time shown in Section III-C.
                                           However, we do touch upon this point later in Section V.
       Fig. 6: Frequency distribution of ground truth and two model                 
       outputsfrom[17]for2secofdatafromthefourthfileinTable                         
       I shows higher frequency content in prediction. This indicates F. Training & Testing Details
       a strategy to choose filter cut off frequency. All models are trained for 50 epochs using the SNNTorch
                                           framework, with a learning rate of 0.005, a dropout rate
                                           between 0.3 − 0.5, and an L2-regularization value between
       It is clear that the predictions have much higher frequency                  
                                           0.005−0.2.AdamWischosenastheoptimizer,MeanSquared
       content indicating ground truth trajectories are smoother. In                
                                           Error (MSE) loss is determined as the loss function, and a
       signal processing, this can be rectified by using a filter, which            
                                           learning scheduler (cosine annealing schedule) is used after
       amounts to adding a memory of the past output. Among the                     
                                           every epoch. For ANN, ANN 3D, and SNN 3D, data is
       differentpossiblefilters,aBesselfilterischosenbecauseofits                   
                                           shuffled with batch size of 512 in training. For SNN 3D,
       linear phase response which is good for maintaining arbitrary                
                                           the membrane potential resets every batch, while reset occurs
       waveform shapes. Three different filtering methods are tested                
                                           at the beginning of each reach for membrane potential in
       in this work. First, we use forward (Fwd) filtering, which can               
                                           SNN streaming and hidden states in LSTM. The distribution
       achieve real-time filtering, but cannot be zero-phase. On the                
                                           of reach dutrations show most reaches completed in less than
       contrary, bidirectional (Bid) filtering can effectively eliminate            
                                           4 sec while some reaches being much longer, presumably due
       phase distortions, but it is generally applicable to offline                 
                                           to the NHP not attending to the task. Similar to [17], reaches
       filteringsincethewholewaveformisneededbeforeprocessing                       
                                           that exceed 8 seconds in length are removed to improve the
       begins. To achieve a compromise, block bidirectional filter                  
                                           trainingperformance.LeakyIntegrate-and-FireNeuronisused
       with a sliding window is applied, such that only a latency                   
                                           inSNNs,wherethethresholdandβarelearnedduringtraining
       penalty of half window size is applicable. In this work, a                   
                                           and Arctan is applied as a surrogate function. The membrane
       window size of 16 was chosen to limit the latency to 32 ms                   
                                           potential of neurons ceases to reset in the last layer to enable
       while the order of filters and their cutoff frequencies were                 
                                           regression. The velocity predicted by SNNs is determined by
       varied between 1−4 and 0.05−0.5 respectively to find the                     
                                           scaling the membrane potential of neurons with a learnable
       optimum for each model.                                                      
                                           constant parameter. For validation and testing, data is input
                                           to the models in chronological order, and reset mechanisms
       E. Metrics                          only occur at the beginning. Filters are employed exclusively
                                           during the inference process.            
        Inordertoevaluatetheperformanceofthemodelscompre-                           
       hensively in terms of cost vs performance, three metrics are                 
       used: (1) number of operations, (2) memory footprint, and (3)                
                                                        IV. RESULTS                 
       accuracy. Three types of operations are considered for (1) – To comprehensively examine the capability of different
       multiply, add and memory read (since the energy for memory models, we performed multiple experiments and evaluated
       access often dominates the energy for computations [31]). models using the metrics mentioned in Section III-E. All
       For most NNs, each synaptic operation comprises a multiply the results except memory access are obtained from the
       and add (MAC) while for SNN Streaming, we only have neurobench harness [17] that does automated evaluation of
       additions (AC). The number of operations is used as proxy the models; memory access is estimated based on theoretical
       for power/energy in this work since the actual energy ratio equations of weight fetches based on experimentally observed
       between these three operations depends on bit-width, process sparsity multiplying the number of weights on a per layer
       node and memory size; more accurate energy evaluations will basis. The findings are presented pictorially using two pareto
       be the subject of future work. For (2), memory footprint is plots, first comparing the accuracy versus operations trade-off

===== PAGE 7 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             7      
                                                                                    
       and the second comparing accuracy versus memory footprint                    
                                                                               
       (e.g. see Figures 8 and 10). For the pareto plots shown in this              
       section, the following colour scheme is used:                                
                                                                               
        • blue markers are base models without filtering (corre-                    
          spond to results from prior work in [17] for ANN,                         
                                                                               
          ANN 3D and SNN 3D)                                                        
        • red markers are models using forward (Fwd) filtering                 
        • green markers are models using bidirectional(Bid) filter-                 
          ing                                                                  
        • orange markers are models using block Bid filtering                       
        • markerswithdarkborderaretinyvariantsofbasemodels                     
       A tabular summary of all the experiments performed for our                   
       base models can be found in Table III.                                  
                                                                             
       A. Model Size Search                                  & R P S O H [ L W \    
        As mentioned earlier, it was found that networks deeper                     
       than3layersperformedpoorlyandhencedeepermodelswere                           
       excluded from this study. The number of neurons in each of                   
       the two hidden layers was determined by searching within                     
       a certain range (N = N and N = 2 are fixed). We                              
                  0   ch    3                                                       
       used the ANN to do this search due to its simplest network                   
       structureandresultantfasttraining.Eachmodelcomplexityis                      
       characterized by the number of neurons. The results obtained                 
       by varying N and N are shown in the Figure 7. The                            
               1    2                                                               
       text shown in the figure represents the different network                    
       architectures(N −N combinations)tested.Asexpected,the                        
                1  2                                                                
       R2 initially increases with increasing number of neurons but                 
       startsdecreasingafterthenumberofneuronsreachesacertain                       
       value due to overfitting. The best trade-off between R2 and                  
       complexity is determined by the networks lying on the pareto                 
       curve. Therefore, the two models with N − N values of                        
                               1   2                                                
       32−48 and 16−32 were selected as the ‘base’ and ‘tiny’                       
       variants respectively for ANN. Same variant sizes were near                  
       optimal for ANN 3D and SNN 3D (we do not show these                          
       tradeoff curves for brevity), while for SNN Streaming, base                  
       and tiny variants represented N −N values of 32−48 and                       
                         1  2                                                       
       16−48 respectively.                                                          
       B. K-Fold Cross Validation                                                   
        It is important to verify that the result will not vary                     
       significantlyregardlessofhowthedataissplit.Hence,K-fold                      
       cross-validation is used to test all six files for three models              
       (ANN,ANN 3DandSNN 3D).Wedividedthedataintofive                               
       parts, randomly selecting four parts as training and the other               
       part was divided into validation and testing. The means and                  
       standarddeviationsofR2 forthe5-foldexperimentareshown                        
       in Table II. Low variance of the results for all 3 cases implies             
       using one-fold data split for our experiment is reasonable and               
       will give dependable results. As a comparison, the results in                
       Table III does show that without filter, the decoding accuracy               
       for SNN 3D is the best and ANN is the worst with ANN 3D                      
       between the two. Hence, we just use the single data split in                 
       [17] described earlier for the rest of the results.                          
       C. Baseline result and effect of filtering                                   
        The pareto plots showing the baseline comparison can be                     
       seen in Figure 8. The filter order and cutoff frequency are                  
                                              05 2 5                                
                                                          32-48                     
                                                                    64-32           
                                                    16-32                           
                                                 8-16                               
                                                    16-48         48-64 32-32       
                                                   16-16      48-32                 
                                                                         64-64      
                                           Fig.7:ComplexityversusR2fordifferentANNmodelstested.
                                           N −N  values of 16−32 and 32−48 were on the pareto 1 2
                                           curve and chosen as ‘tiny’ and ‘baseline’ variants.
                                                  TABLE II: K-fold Cross Validation 
                                                 Models R2 Mean R2 Standard Deviation
                                                 ANN   0.6186    0.0294             
                                                ANN 3D 0.6467    0.0299             
                                                SNN 3D 0.6661    0.0252             
                                           chosen separately for different filtering methods and different
                                           models. For ANN, ANN 3D, SNN 3D and SNN Streaming,
                                           filter order and cutoff frequency are 4 and 0.05 for bidirec-
                                           tional filtering, while in block bid filtering, order is selected
                                           as 2. For forward filtering, the parameters are 1 and 0.15 for
                                           order and cutoff frequency respectively. However, these are
                                           different in LSTM and set at 2 and 0.07 for order and cutoff
                                           for all kinds of filtering methods. These optimal parameters
                                           were selected based on results in the validation set by doing
                                           a grid search over filter orders 1−4 and cut-off frequencies
                                           in the range 0.05−0.5 as mentioned earlier in Section III-D.
                                            In terms of the models that forms the pareto front of
                                           operations vs. accuracy (Fig. 8(a)), we observe all of them
                                           usebidirectionalfilteringtoachievetheirhighaccuracy.While
                                           this is impractical in real-time decoding, these results can
                                           be taken as a gold standard for the neurobench suite at this
                                           time since they represent the highest reported accuracy so
                                           far. Along the pareto front, the two SNN variants, SNN 3D
                                           and SNN Streaming show the biggest difference in terms
                                           of operations required (≈ 100x) and accuracies (≈ 0.022),
                                           while LSTM and ANN 3D are at intermediate positions on
                                           the pareto front. In terms of memory usage (Fig. 8(b)), the
                                           pareto front is dominated by SNNs of the two types. The
                                           ANN 3D models have highest memory usage due to their
                                           input dimension being expanded by m times to m×N –the
                                                                          ch        
                                           weights in the first layer are dominant for memory footprint
                                           since N >>N ,N ,N .                      
                                               0    1 2  3                          
                                            IfweignoremodelswithBidfilteringduetothemnotbeing
                                           applicable in real-time, the next pareto frontier is dominated
                                           bymodelswithblockBiDfiltering.Boththeseresultspointto
                                           theextremeefficiencyofcombiningNNmodelswithtraditional
                                           filtering for motor decoding. In that case, the pareto frontier

===== PAGE 8 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             8      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                               í                                 
                                                                                             
                                                             7 L P H   V         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       Fig. 8: Baseline Pareto plots showing trade-offs for different               
       models: a) Compute cost vs. accuracy b) Memory footprint                     
       vs. accuracy                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       for operations vs. accuracy consists of LSTM at the high                     
       end and SNN streaming at the low end with ANN 3D in                          
       the middle. For the case of memory vs. accuracy, LSTM and                    
       SNN streamingretaintheirpositionsatthetopandbottomof                         
       the pareto curve, while SNN 3D is in the intermediate part.                  
       Figure 9 plots the actual trajectory of a ground truth reach                 
       waveform, a prediction from ANN 3D, and a filtered version.                  
       It can be seen how the filtered waveform is smoother and                     
       resembles the more natural motion of the primate’s finger.                   
        Looking deeper at the effects of filtering, we see that                     
       Fwd filtering provided very little gains to most of the NN                   
       models. Using the block Bid filter provided maximum gains                    
       of ≈ 0.05, 0.04 and 0.03 in R2 for ANN 3d, SNN 3D and                        
       ANN models, while the gains were lower (≈0.02 or less) for                   
       LSTM and SNN streaming models. This is intuitively under-                    
       standable given that recurrent models have an inbuilt longer                 
       memory. Also, we see that tiny variant of ANN with block                     
       Bid filtering achieves similar accuracy of ≈ 0.61 as the tiny                
                                                V  P F   \ W L F R O H 9  ;    
                                                     $ 1 1   '                    
                                                     $ 1 1   '    I L O W H U  
                                                     * 7                            
                                           Fig. 9: Predicted trajectory of X-velocity with and without
                                           filter showing the smoothness introduced by the filter making
                                           it similar to natural motion.            
                                           or base SNN streaming without filtering at similar memory
                                           and ≈8X computations. This confirms our initial hypothesis
                                           that adding memory to ANN models can indeed make their
                                           performance similar to SNNs. However, the performance of
                                           SNN streaming also improves with the addition of the filter
                                           makingthiscombinationagreatchoicefordecodingwithvery
                                           low computational and memory resources.  
                                           D. 80% vs 50% Training Split             
                                            To assess the performance of models when the training
                                           data increases, we increase the baseline training data from
                                           50% to 80% as done in [28]. The results are listed in Table
                                           III and plotted in Figure 10. As expected, the R2 of all
                                           models is generally higher by 0.03−0.04 compared to the
                                           50% baseline training data, which shows a high capacity for
                                           future improvement with more. Similar to Fig. 8, Fig. 10 also
                                           has models with Bid or block Bid filtering on the pareto
                                           curve. After the data increases, LSTM and ANN 3D show
                                           the greatest accuracy improvement with an increase of 0.04
                                           in R2. In addition, LSTM becomes one of the frontiers in
                                           the Pareto plot for both memory footprint and operations
                                           displacing SNN 3D off the pareto curve in Fig. 10(a) for
                                           operations.                              
                                                        V. DISCUSSION               
                                            This section discusses additional control experiments and
                                           gives an outlook for future improvements.
                                           A. Effect of Reach Removal               
                                            As mentioned in Section III-F, some of the reaches in the
                                           dataset spanned a much longer duration (sometimes longer
                                           than 200 seconds) than the rest which mostly were less
                                           than 4 seconds. These reaches (longer than 8 seconds) were
                                           removed from training since the NHP was likely unattentive

===== PAGE 9 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             9      
                                                                                    
                       TABLE III: Baseline Performance and Comparison with Prior Works
                                                                                    
                                                       Computes                     
            Models Split Filters    R2      Activation             ModelSize(kB)    
                                            Sparsity                                
                                                  MACs ACs Memoryaccess             
                        NoFilter[17] 0.5818 0.7514 4969.76 0 5,179.46 26.5234       
                        FwdFiltering 0.5874 0.7514 4971.76 0 5,181.46 26.5312       
                   50%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6064 0.7514 4972.76 0 5,182.46 26.5351   
                        BidFiltering 0.6168 0.7514 4974.76 0 5,184.46 26.5429       
            ANN                                                                     
                         NoFilter 0.6119(+0.03) 0.7417 5000.25 0 5,205.65 26.5234   
                        FwdFiltering 0.6169(+0.03) 0.7417 5002.25 0 5,207.65 26.5312
                   80%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6361(+0.03) 0.7417 5003.25 0 5,208.65 26.5351
                        BidFiltering 0.6461(+0.03) 0.7417 5005.25 0 5,210.65 26.5429
                        NoFilter[17] 0.6013 0.7348 11507.07 0 11,555.31 134.5234    
                        FwdFiltering 0.6095 0.7348 11509.07 0 11,557.31 134.5312    
                   50%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6495 0.7348 11510.07 0 11,558.31 134.5351
                        BidFiltering 0.656  0.7348 11512.07 0 11,560.31 134.5429    
            ANN 3D                                                                  
                         NoFilter 0.6523(+0.05) 0.7324 11676.22 0 11,644.82 134.5234
                        FwdFiltering 0.6553(+0.05) 0.7324 11678.22 0 11,646.82 134.5312
                   80%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6769(+0.03) 0.7324 11679.22 0 11,647.82 134.5351
                        BidFiltering 0.6887(+0.03) 0.7324 11681.22 0 11,649.82 134.5429
                        NoFilter[17] 0.6219  0    32256 0   39,057.79 33.1992       
                        FwdFiltering 0.6318  0    32258 0   39,058.79 33.207        
                   50%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6579 0 32259 0   39,059.79 33.2109       
                        BidFiltering 0.6687  0    32261 0   39,062.79 33.2187       
            SNN 3D                                                                  
                         NoFilter 0.6564(+0.03) 0 32256 0   39,701.38 33.1992       
                        FwdFiltering 0.6617(+0.03) 0 32258 0 39,702.38 33.207       
                   80%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6948(+0.04) 0 32259 0 39,703.38 33.2109  
                        BidFiltering 0.6909(+0.02) 0 32261 0 39,706.38 33.2187      
                         NoFilter   0.6112  0.7453 0   971.26 1,195.28 25.32        
                        FwdFiltering 0.6109 0.7453 0   973.26 1,197.28 25.3278      
                   50%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6342 0.7453 0 974.26 1,198.28 25.3317    
                        BidFiltering 0.6458 0.7453 0   976.26 1,200.28 25.3395      
          SNN Streaming                                                             
                         NoFilter 0.6483(+0.04) 0.7795 0 883.36 1,044.23 25.32      
                        FwdFiltering 0.6486(+0.04) 0.7795 0 885.36 1,046.23 25.3278 
                   80%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6674(+0.03) 0.7795 0 886.36 1,047.23 25.3317
                        BidFiltering 0.6761(+0.03) 0.7795 0 888.36 1,049.23 25.3395 
                         NoFilter   0.6508   0   22687.97 0 22913.27  90.95         
                        FwdFiltering 0.6506  0   22690.97 0 22915.27  90.96         
                   50%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.6669 0 22690.97 0 22916.27 90.96         
                        BidFiltering 0.6683  0   22690.97 0 22918.27  90.96         
            LSTM                                                                    
                         NoFilter 0.6943(+0.04) 0 22687.97 0 22912.40 90.95         
                        FwdFiltering 0.6932(+0.04) 0 22690.97 0 22914.40 90.96      
                   80%                                                              
                       BlockBidFiltering 0.7044(+0.04) 0 22690.97 0 22915.40 90.96  
                        BidFiltering 0.7051(+0.04) 0 22690.97 0 22917.40 90.96      
           SNN2D[17] 50%   -        0.5805  0.9976 0   413.52 -       28.56         
         rEFH dynamic[15] 320s∗ - 0.6319(bin width=128) - - - -        -            
                                                  TABLE IV: Effect of Reach Removal 
       in these cases. However, they were not removed from the                      
       testing data and hence, we explored how much improvement                     
                                                  Models Split Filters R2           
       in performance is obtained by better curating the test dataset.              
                                                            NoFilter 0.5921(+0.01)  
       TheseresultsarepresentedintheTableIVandwecanobserve ANN 50% FwdFiltering 0.5977(+0.01)
                                                          BlockBidFiltering 0.6155(+0.009)
       that the R2 increases by ≈0.01 with the baseline 50% split– BidFiltering 0.6249(+0.008)
                                                            NoFilter 0.6133(+0.01)  
       the improvement can be much more if other files from [15]                    
                                                           FwdFiltering 0.6225(+0.01)
                                                 ANN 3D 50%                         
       are selected. This underlines the effectiveness and necessity BlockBidFiltering 0.6588(+0.009)
                                                           BidFiltering 0.6690(+0.01)
       of careful data selection from the recordings in [15] while NoFilter 0.6286(+0.007)
                                                           FwdFiltering 0.6437(+0.01)
       training and testing models.              SNN 3D 50% BlockBidFiltering 0.6652(+0.007)
                                                           BidFiltering 0.6755(+0.007)
                                                            NoFilter 0.6212(+0.01)  
                                                           FwdFiltering 0.6208(+0.01)
                                                SNN Streaming 50%                   
       B. Latency of Filters                              BlockBidFiltering 0.6433(+0.009)
                                                           BidFiltering 0.6542(+0.008)
        Latency between input and output is important for real- NoFilter 0.6784(+0.03)
                                                           FwdFiltering 0.6779(+0.03)
                                                  LSTM 50%                          
       time applications with closed-loop operation such as motor BlockBidFiltering 0.6788(+0.01)
                                                           BidFiltering 0.6800(+0.01)
       decoding. The total time, T , taken to produce an output by                  
                      tot                                                           
       a NN decoder is given by T =St+T where St is the                             
                      tot     comp                                                  
       stride to capture the new input data (= T = 4 ms in this                     
                               GT                                                   
       work)andT isthetimetakentoprocessthecomputations window, T does not add any extra penalty on latency of
              comp                               W                                  
       intheneuralnetwork.Giventheveryfastandenergy-efficient output generation; however, after every change of target, the
       In-memory computing (IMC) approaches to implement NN predictionwillbeinaccurateforatimerelatedtoT toallow
                                                                        W           
       models prevalent now [32], [33] and the small networks enough relevant input to fill up the bin window. However,
       consideredinthispaper,wecanassumeT <<Stmaking output filtering may induce an extra penalty on the latency.
                              comp                                                  
       the throughput almost entirely dependent on St, i.e. time Bid filters produced best results as seen in the earlier section;
       taken to capture new neural input spikes. Note that the bin however, they cannot be employed in real-time applications

===== PAGE 10 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             10     
                                                                                    
                                           shows the sparsity may harm accuracy. We proposed two
                                           types of SNN models in this paper–one is SNN 3D, which
                                           has no sparsity due to the layer normalization, and another
                                           one is SNN streaming, which has a relatively higher sparsity.
                                           Interestingly, the low power characteristic of SNN is not
                                           reflected in the first SNN model, whereas it has relatively
                                           higheraccuracy.Thispointstotheneedforfutureresearchinto
                                           datanormalizationtechniqueswhichcanstillretainsparsityof
                                           activations. Another reason for the high accuracy of SNN 3D
                                           was its reset of membrane potential after every T . This
                                                                         W          
                                           implies the membrane potential during training and testing
                                           start at exactly the same value for any sequence of inputs
                                           making it easier for the network to recognize similar patterns
                                           of input. For SNN streaming, since there is no regular reset
                                           mechanism,themembranevoltagesduringtrainingandtesting
                                           may be quite different which may hurt accuracy. Mitigating
                                           this issue with initial condition of streaming SNNs will be a
                                           part of future work.                     
                                            We see different models along the pareto curve having dif-
                                           ferent strengths. For example, models with block Bid filtering
                                           have high accuracy but high latency. Using multiple models
                                           to produce a combined output may be a useful strategy. For
                                           example, switching from a model with block Bid filter to one
                                           without a filter right after a change of target/context will help
                                           in balancing latency and accuracy.       
                                            Finally, all the weights used in this work used float 32 as
                                           the default precision. However, there is a significant amount
                                           of work to quantize the models for more efficient inference.
                                           Applying these approaches of quantization aware training
                                           should allow us to reduce the model footprint significantly
                                           in the future.                           
                                                       VI. CONCLUSION               
       Fig. 10: Pareto plots showing trade-offs for different models                
                                            Scaling iBMI systems to tens of thousands of channels in
       with increased training data to 80% from the originally used                 
                                           the future as well as removing the connecting wires would
       50%: a) Compute cost vs. accuracy b) Memory footprint vs.                    
                                           requiresignificantcompressionofdataonthedevicetoreduce
       accuracy                                                                     
                                           wireless datarates. Integrating the signal processing chain
                                           up to the neural decoder offers interesting opportunities to
                                           maximizecompression.Inthiscontext, thisworkexploresthe
       since they need to store the raw data in memory first and                    
                                           usage of different neural network models and combines them
       then apply forward filtering two times in opposite directions.               
                                           with traditional signal filtering techniques to explore accuracy
       The block Bid filter is chosen as a compromise where the                     
                                           vs cost trade-offs where the cost is measured in terms of
       filter window is used to determine the length or block of                    
                                           memory footprint and number of operations. Adding Bessel
       samplesthatarefilteredatonetime,andthepredictedpointis                       
                                           filteringimprovestheperformanceofallfiveNNmodelswith
       located at the center of the sample window. Thus, the latency                
                                           Bidirectional(Bid)andblockBidfilteringgeneratingthestate-
       introducedbytheblockBidfilteristheoreticallyequaltohalf                      
                                           of-the-art results in offline and online filtering respectively. In
       thelengthofthefilterwindow.Inthispaper,windowsizewas                         
                                           general, LSTM and SNN streaming models occupy the high
       fixed to 16 samples resulting in a latency of 32 ms. While                   
                                           and low ends of the pareto curves (for accuracy vs. mem-
       this is acceptable in motor decoding, other applications may                 
                                           ory/operations) respectively while SNN 3D and ANN 3D
       require lower latency. One possibility is to use analog Bessel               
                                           occupy intermediate positions.           
       filters which do not require such Bid filtering and this will be             
       a focus of future work.                                                      
                                                      ACKNOWLEDGMENT                
       C. Future Directions                                                         
        ThemainreasonforlowenergyconsumptioninSNNisdue We acknowledge useful discussions with the Motor decod-
       to the benefits of sparse activations. However, our experiment ing group in Neurobench.

===== PAGE 11 =====

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                             11     
                                                                                    
                    REFERENCES             [24] Friedenberg, D., Schwemmer, M., Landgraf, A., Annetta, N., Bock-
                                              brader, M., Bouton, C. & Others Neuroprosthetic-enabled control of
       [1] Zhang,M.,Tang,Z.,Liu,X.&Spiegel,J.Electronicneuralinterfaces. gradedarmmusclecontractioninaparalyzedhuman.SciRep.2017;7:
         NatureElectronics.3,191-200(2020)    8386.                                 
       [2] Pandarinath, C. & Al. High performance communication by people [25] Zhang,Z.&Constandinou,T.Firing-rate-modulatedspikedetectionand
         withparalysisusinganintracorticalbrain-computerinterface.ELife.pp. neuraldecodingco-design.JournalOfNeuralEngineering.20,036003
         e18554(2017)                         (2023,5),https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1741-2552/accece
       [3] Libedinsky, C., So, R. & Al Independent mobility achieved through a [26] Moses,D.,Metzger,S.,Liu,J.,Anumanchipalli,G.,Makin,J.,Sun,P.,
         wirelessbrain-machineinterface.PLOSOne.11(2016) Chartier,J.,Dougherty,M.,Liu,P.,Abrams,G.,Tu-Chan,A.,Ganguly,
       [4] Ajiboye, W. & Al. Restoration of reaching and grasping move- ments K. & Chang, E. Neuroprosthesis for Decoding Speech in a Paralyzed
         throughbrain-controlledmusclestimulationinapersonwithtetraplegia: PersonwithAnarthria.NewEnglandJournalOfMedicine.385,217-227
         a proof-of-concept demonstration. The Lancet. 10081 pp. 1821-1830 (2021,7),https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2027540
         (2017)                            [27] Schuman, C., Kulkarni, S., Parsa, M., Mitchell, J., Date, P. & Kay, B.
       [5] Metzger, S. & Et.al. A high-performance neuroprosthesis for speech Opportunitiesforneuromorphiccomputingalgorithmsandapplications.
         decodingandavatarcontrol.Nature.620pp.1037-1046(2023) NatureComputationalScience.2,10-19(2022,1)
       [6] Willett,F.&Et.al.Ahigh-performancespeechneuroprosthesis.Nature. [28] Liao, J., Widmer, L., Wang, X., Di Mauro, A., Nason-Tomaszewski,
         620pp.1031-1036(2023)                S., Chestek, C., Benini, L. & Jang, T. An Energy-Efficient Spiking
                                              Neural Network for Finger Velocity Decoding for Implantable Brain-
       [7] Willett, F., Avansino, D., Hochberg, L., Henderson, J. & Shenoy, K.      
         High-performancebrain-to-textcommunicationviahandwriting.Nature.           
                                              MachineInterface.2022IEEE4thInternationalConferenceOnArtificial
                                              IntelligenceCircuitsAndSystems(AICAS).pp.134-137(2022)
         593,249-254(2021,5),https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03506-2             
                                           [29] O’Doherty, J., MB, M., Makin, J. & Sabes, P. Nonhuman pri-
       [8] Basu,I.,Yousefi,A.,Crocker,B.,Zelmann,R.,Paulk,A.,Peled,N.,El-           
                                              matereachingwithmultichannelsensorimotorcortexelectrophysiology.
         lard,K.,Weisholtz,D.,Cosgrove,G.,Deckersbach,T.,Eden,U.,Eskan-             
                                              (https://zenodo.org/records/583331)   
         dar,E.,Dougherty,D.,Cash,S.&Widge,A.Closed-loopenhancement                 
                                           [30] Chen, Y., Yao, E. & Basu, A. A 128-Channel Extreme Learning
         andneuraldecodingofcognitivecontrolinhumans.NatureBiomedical               
                                              Machine-Based Neural Decoder for Brain Machine Interfaces. IEEE
         Engineering.7,576-588(2021,11),https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-         
                                              Trans.OnBiomedicalCircuitsAndSystems.10,679-692(2016)
         00804-y                                                                    
                                           [31] Horowitz, M. 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what we can
       [9] Musk, E. An Integrated Brain-Machine Interface Platform With Thou-       
                                              do about it). 2014 IEEE International Solid-state Circuits Conference
         sands of Channels. Journal Of Medical Internet Research. 21, e16194        
                                              DigestOfTechnicalPapers(ISSCC).pp.10-14(2014)
         (2019,10),https://doi.org/10.2196/16194                                    
                                           [32] Sebastian, A. & Al. Memory devices and applications for in-memory
       [10] Yin,B.&Al.AnImplantableWirelessNeuralInterfaceforRecording              
                                              computing.NatureNanotechnology.15,529-544(2020)
         Cortical Circuit Dynamics in Moving Primates. Journal Of Neural            
                                           [33] Zhang,C.&Al.ChallengesandtrendsofSRAM-basedcomputing-in-
         Engineering.10(2013)                                                       
                                              memory for AI edge devices. IEEE Trans. On CAS-I. 68, 1773-1786
       [11] Stevenson, I. & Kording, K. How advances in neural recording affect     
                                              (2021)                                
         dataanalysis.NatureBiomedicalEngineerng.14pp.139-142(2011,1)               
       [12] Chen,N.&Al.Power-savingdesignopportunitiesforwirelessintracor-          
         tical brain–computer interfaces. Nature Biomedical Engineering. 4 pp.      
         984-996(2020)                                                              
       [13] Basu,A.,Yi,C.&Enyi,Y.BigDataManagementinNeuralImplants:                 
         The Neuromorphic Approach. Emerging Technology And Architecture            
         ForBig-dataAnalytics.pp.293-311(2017) Zhou Biyan received her Bachelors degree in Electrical Engineering from
       [14] Shaikh,S.,So,R.,Sibindi,T.,Libedinsky,C.&Basu,A.TowardsIntel- Hohai University and her Masters degree in Electrical and Electronic En-
         ligent Intracortical BMI (i²BMI): Low-Power Neuromorphic Decoders gineering from Nanyang Technological University. She’s currently pursuing
         That Outperform Kalman Filters. IEEE Transactions On Biomedical her PhD at the City University of Hong Kong, focusing on spiking neural
         CircuitsAndSystems.13,1615-1624(2019) network,neuraldecoderandbrainmachineinterfaces.
       [15] Makin, J., O’Doherty, J., Cardoso, B., M. & Sabes, P. Superior arm-     
         movement decoding from cortex with a new, unsupervised-learning            
         algorithm.JournalNeuralEngineering.15(2018)                                
                                           Pao-Sheng Vincent Sun received his Bachelors in Computer Engineering
       [16] Willsey, M., Nason-Tomaszewski, S., Ensel, S., Temmar, H., Mender,      
                                           and Masters in Electical and Electronic Engineering from the University of
         M., Costello, J., Patil, P. & Chestek, C. Real-time brain-machine          
                                           WesternAustralia.Aftergraduation,hehasworkedintheautomotiveindustry
         interfaceinnon-humanprimatesachieveshigh-velocityprostheticfinger          
                                           developing next generation smart lighting devices and setting up business
         movementsusingashallowfeedforwardneuralnetworkdecoder.Nature               
                                           analytics using machine learning with cloud computing. He is currently
         Communications.13,6899(2022)                                               
                                           workingtowardshisPhDattheCityUniversityofHongKong,withprimary
       [17] Yik,J.,Ahmed,S.,Ahmed,Z.,Anderson,B.,Andreou,A.,Bartolozzi,             
                                           focus on computer vision based neuromorphic computing, spiking neural
         C.,Basu,A.,Blanken,D.,Bogdan,P.,Bohte,S.&OthersNeuroBench:                 
                                           networkanddeeplearningforedgeapplication.
         Advancing neuromorphic computing through collaborative, fair and           
         representativebenchmarking.ArXivPreprintArXiv:2304.04640.(2023)            
       [18] Stevenson,I.Trackingadvancesinneuralrecording.StatisticalNeuro-         
         scienceLab.,https://stevenson.lab.uconn.edu/scaling/ Arindam Basu Arindam Basu received the B.Tech and M.Tech degrees
                                           in Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering from the Indian
       [19] Georgopoulos, A., Schwartz, A. & Kettner, R. Neuronal population        
                                           InstituteofTechnology,Kharagpurin2005,theM.S.degreeinMathematics
         codingofmovementdirection.Science.233,1416-1419(1986)                      
                                           and PhD. degree in Electrical Engineering from the Georgia Institute of
       [20] Koyama, S., Chase, S., Whitford, A., Velliste, M., Schwartz, A. &       
                                           Technology, Atlanta in 2009 and 2010 respectively. Dr. Basu received the
         Kass,R.Comparisonofbrain–computerinterfacedecodingalgorithms               
                                           Prime Minister of India Gold Medal in 2005 from I.I.T Kharagpur. He is
         in open-loop and closed-loop control. Journal Of Computational Neu-        
                                           currently a Professor in City University of Hong Kong in the Department
         roscience.29pp.73-87(2010)                                                 
                                           ofElectricalEngineeringandwasatenuredAssociateProfessoratNanyang
       [21] Kim, S., Simeral, J., Hochberg, L., Donoghue, J. & Black, M. Neural     
                                           TechnologicalUniversitybeforethis.       
         controlofcomputercursorvelocitybydecodingmotorcorticalspiking              
                                            HeiscurrentlyanAssociateEditoroftheIEEESensorsjournal,Frontiers
         activityinhumanswithtetraplegia.JournalOfNeuralEngineering.5,              
                                           inNeuroscience,IOPNeuromorphicComputingandEngineering,andIEEE
         455(2008)                                                                  
                                           Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems. He has served as IEEE
       [22] Hochberg,L.,Bacher,D.,Jarosiewicz,B.,Masse,N.,Simeral,J.,Vogel,         
                                           CAS Distinguished Lecturer for the 2016-17 period. Dr. Basu received the
         J.,Haddadin,S.,Liu,J.,Cash,S.,VanDerSmagt,P.&OthersReach                   
                                           best student paper award at the Ultrasonics symposium, in 2006, the best
         andgraspbypeoplewithtetraplegiausinganeurallycontrolledrobotic             
                                           livedemonstrationatISCAS2010,andafinalistpositioninthebeststudent
         arm.Nature.485,372-375(2012)                                               
                                           paper contest at ISCAS 2008. He was awarded MIT Technology Review’s
       [23] Sharma, G., Friedenberg, D., Annetta, N., Glenn, B., Bockbrader, M.,    
                                           TR35 Asia Pacific award in 2012 and inducted into Georgia Tech Alumni
         Majstorovic,C.,Domas,S.,Mysiw,W.,Rezai,A.&Bouton,C.Usingan                 
                                           Association’s40under40classof2022.       
         artificialneuralbypasstorestorecorticalcontrolofrhythmicmovements          
         inahumanwithquadriplegia.ScientificReports.6,33807(2016)                   